We have an entire computer system
dedicated to memos at the State
Department, right? And if you actually
upload anything there, it's on Reuters
within an hour, so you can't use it. So,
we're hand walking around paper like
we're in the 40s.
[Music]
Who is actually running the US
government under this administration?
Did the spirit of Doge outlast Elon
Musk? How are Doge and America First
changing US foreign policy?
My guest today is a youthful veteran of
the Department of Government Efficiency
and now he's in charge of implementing
the Trump administration's sweeping
changes to foreign aid and development
work. Jeremy Leuen, welcome to
Interesting Times.
>> Thank you so much for having me. I'm I'm
really glad to great to be here. So,
we're going to talk about policy, about
the transformation of foreign aid,
especially, and how the Trump
administration sees America's
humanitarian obligations. But first, I
want to talk a little bit about your own
career and background and how you ended
up as a senior bureau official for the
Office of Foreign Assistance. So, you
came into the government through Doge,
right? The Department of Government
Efficiency.
>> Yeah, that's right. Um, so you know, the
president won a resounding victory in in
November. I was going about my life in
Los Angeles in the private sector and a
friend of mine who worked with Elon
Musk. I'd never met Elon in my life. Um,
but he he worked with Elon and sort of
had become one of the first employees in
what was then Doge as part of the Trump
administration's transition effort.
Called me up and said, "Hey, you know, I
think you'd be a really good fit for
this. Do you want to sort of join join
the effort?" And at first I was sort of
uh reluctant. I never sort of viewed
myself as having a career in government.
Partly because uh the way that
government has been conducted in the
last 30 or 40 years is something that
like many people who support the
president um we just simply don't uh see
as aligned with our sort of vision for
the future. Um but when he ran so I've
been a Trump supporter in in various
forms since I was in college and he
first ran for president in 2016.
>> Were you were you in college then?
>> I was. Yeah. Um and so when when he
first ran in 2015, what first actually
drew me to the president was his uh
message on China. Um at that time we
were sort of waking up to the realities
of of their capture of of various sort
of international organizations of NOS's
of uh the trade infrastructure of the
World Trade Organization of the World
Health Organization etc. and the
president was the only person who was
really speaking clearly about these
issues um and really talking about the
effect on sort of um economic policy on
trade on jobs etc in America.
>> So what did you what were you so you
were in college then what were you
planning since you mentioned you you
didn't plan to go work in government um
what was your plan for your 20s and what
did you actually end up doing? Yeah. So,
I went to law school. Um, I had sort of
done some finance in in college. I
thought maybe I'd go back to that. I
ended up doing working at a law firm,
doing litigation, regulatory work. I was
in DC and I did clerk for the US Court
of Appeals for the District Columbia
Circuit. So, it's not like I wasn't that
interested in sort of public law and
public policy. Um, but I went back to
Los Angeles sort of planning on getting
married. I'm engaged and was going to
start a life. Um, have a family and and
sort of work in the private sector and
be a citizen. I mean be politically
involved to the extent that I read
things that I discuss it. But um
particularly the last sort of four years
of the Biden administration were um
deeply upsetting I think to a lot of
people who wanted to have uh any chance
at resetting where things had gone in
those sort of Obama years, right?
Because as someone who was a critic of
the Obama years, it was very exciting.
Obviously, when the president was office
2016 to 2020, President Biden ran on
this mission of sort of restoring
certain things on bringing decency and
bipartisanship. And then of course you
see through the sort of growth of the of
progressivism and sort of these these
neo-Marxist socialist ideas, the
critical race theory, all of that on the
left, you see this presidency and that
was um very sort of depressing. Um for
lack of a, you know, not to use the
internet term, but it was sort of a
black pill in a sense to watch the
country decline into that. Um at the
time he's he's prosecuting the
president. You don't know whether
President Trump is going to go to jail.
um you know, you sort of have this
obviously scenile man um running the
country. You're not really sure who's
running the country. The policy outcomes
are horrible. You've got sort of mass
immigration.
>> But you supported President Biden or
then I guess candidate Biden for
president in 2020. Isn't that correct?
>> That's simply not true.
>> No.
>> I voted for President Trump in every
election since I've been a voter.
So, when Joe Biden was elected in 2020,
did you not send a celebratory message
saying that you were so proud to be part
of Team Joe since last fall? Because
that was reported in a screenshot, I
believe, in the Boston Globe.
There were a lot of lies that were uh
spread about me in the media when it was
announced that I would be taking a
leadership role at USCID. A lot of
people went back. A lot of people from
my background who don't agree with me
sort of said various things on various
things took various points uh out of
context. Um you know at the time in 2020
I think a lot of people um felt as
though there was a certain vision of a
Biden presidency again which was turned
out not to be true. Um, and maybe there
was some degree of optimism when um, you
know, he was inaugurated and talked
about um, you know, bringing America
back together and working on
conservative ideas and that was the
failure of his presidency. Um, but no,
I've supported I've been a Republican
since I can remember. Um, I've worked
with Democrats. I've engaged with
Democrats. I've been sort of open to
Democratic ideas, but I have been a
Republican for my entire adult life.
>> So, you were you were happy when Trump
won. You're 28 years old. You have an
impressive resume. You have a little bit
of law and business experience, right?
You weren't planning into going into
government. Your friend, so your friend,
did your friend work for one of Musk's
companies? The friend who called you up?
>> Yeah, he worked at Tesla. Um,
>> so he so he calls you up and says, "Send
your resume to Doge." like what's what
was actually the process for joining
>> I'm not going to get into all of the
specifics but it was a series of sort of
calls and interviews um
>> frankly you know this quotion of the
administration that's doing the hard
operational work it's less about
ideology and more about um being
operationally excellent especially for
Elon because ultimately and I think this
is like a key realization in government
everyone wants to be their own policy
maker and we can sit here and discuss my
views I certainly have my own views but
that's not my job and that's not the job
of nearly anyone in the administration.
Your job is to execute the vision that
the president that the secretary that
senior leadership lays out. You you
notice this in the bureaucracy all the
time. There's sort of a well I have to
follow the letter of this command but do
I have to follow the spirit? Is my job
to actually implement what the president
or the secretary wants or is it to sort
of narrowly uh you know do what I'm told
but also implement my own vision. And so
I think you know this idea that um
>> but it's also but it's also a shift
where you know you're not at all someone
who you know worked in the diplomatic
corps right worked in the state
department worked on foreign aid. So
part of the model clearly is bringing in
let's say smart young generalists right
and sort of setting them to work inside
the bureaucracy and that's why you are
where you are right now right I suppose
in some sense yes um and I think there's
tremendous value in having an object the
objectivity that comes with not having
been part of the diplomatic core but
ultimately again it's about working hard
and executing faithfully the vision
that's sort of set forward by the people
who were elected um confirmed and sort
of are leading the policy vision. So
that's always been my task whether it
was on Doge or now sort of in a more
formal role at the State Department.
It's to execute the secretary's vision
um and the president's vision and and to
do so faithfully. Um and so I think
that's the most important qualification.
I happen to have certain skills or a
certain mindset that has allowed me I
think uh to be effective in that. So
were you assigned to the state
department after you after you onboarded
with Doge or was it you know was this a
choice like how how did you start? Well,
so I I was going to have a different
role um in in the administration and
then sort of when the USID situation
sort of came to the four and so backing
up the idea of sort of taking USID,
which was this unaccountable independent
institution that was doing foreign
policy and foreign assistance out of
alignment with the national interest,
out of align with the diplomatic
priorities of the State Department, out
of align with what the president, the
secretary of state wanted to be doing.
That's sort of an idea that's been
kicked around for a long time and there
have been various proposals to merge
USAD under state and certainly the
secretary had been thinking about that
for a long time. Um that being said,
Doge did not go in with the idea that
they would be part of this sort of um
rapid change in the structure of foreign
assistance. And so about the second
week, and Elon has talked about this
before, we realized and sort of
indicative of of the sort of lack of
accountability and leadership at USAD,
um that they were making payments that
were in violation of of some of the
president's executive orders, the
foreign assistance pause, etc. And so
sort of Elon um had been tasked by the
president with sort of investigating the
situation. And then there was a
determination that um you know we would
be much more rapidly implementing the
sort of restructuring of USAD. And at
that point um yes I suppose in some
sense I was uh I was assigned with that.
>> Okay. And so USAD then becomes a special
focus, right? As you said, there had
always been sort of running critiques
um from conservatives especially, right,
that USAD is
um you know, build building a kind of
progressive oriented matrix of programs
and so on.
>> It's not even progressivism. I I think
like if you just back up, USAD viewed
his constituency as the global
humanitarian complex. it did not view
its constituency as the American
taxpayer or the national interest of the
United States. So, I mean, you hear this
and you see it in all of the documents
that they prepare. One of the biggest
complaints is, and I've heard this, I've
talked to more than 30 ambassadors, most
of whom were appointed by Biden or were
sort of are members of the career, you
know, foreign service, right? And you
would see examples where they would say,
hey, you know, this country in Africa
doesn't actually want this program. It's
not in alignment with sort of what the
government wants. It's not in alignment
what's on the ground. But you know who
wanted it was some non-governmental
organization or international
organization that you know a bunch of
Obama Biden alums or all these people
that worked at USAD were at right so
they would push and you'd have you know
senior Biden officials traveling to
countries and batting down career
ambassadors telling them no you don't
understand that diplomatic priorities
what what matters here's what the UN is
telling you right and so you've got
America's representative on the ground
saying the country that we're
implementing this foreign assistance in
doesn't even want it and and it's not
advancing our interest. To the contrary,
they're upset about it. And yet, we are
still paying. We're still using American
taxpayer dollars to pay for a program
that, you know, sort of our ambassador
on the ground doesn't want, the country
doesn't want. What conceivable benefit
are we as Americans getting for the
national interest of this country by
funding that program? And I think that's
the problem that we were really seeking
to address most of all, you know, w with
the sort of restructuring of USAD and
also frankly again to get rid of
programs that do not deliver for the
American people. I I want to get into
the specifics of what what you think
doesn't deliver in a minute, but I I
want to ask you about the speed here,
how quickly this was accomplished. Um, a
lot of the critiques of what happened
with Doge was that speed basically
became um, a license to um, you know,
have programs stop working for a while,
right? Because you're trying to change
things so quickly or you're cancelling
grants that then have to be restarted
and so on, right? And so in the case of
foreign aid, um you know, you have a
promise that life-saving aid gets a
would get a waiver from the suspensions,
but then there were all kinds of
questions about like, well, how are you
delivering aid if you are cutting staff
over here or if this system isn't
working over there? So again, before we
get into the specifics, why did it need
to happen so rapidly, right? Like isn't
there isn't there a benefit in terms of
the continuity of programs and the
success of programs that you want to
keep to take an extra month to make sure
that the aid shipments are all getting
delivered right or that the waiver is
actually taking effect and the people
who are eligible for you know getting
antimmalarials and so on are actually
getting them on time.
>> A couple points I think it's first worth
noting what the secretary said at his
budget testimony a couple months ago. He
was in the Senate for more than a decade
and people had talked about these
various ideas including sort of the
restructuring of USCID, the
restructuring of foreign assistance.
Many of these ideas were talked about in
the first Trump administration and they
didn't get done because of how sort of
entrenched the bureaucracy is, how
difficult it is to get these things
done. So if you don't move quickly,
there's sort of a tremendous, you could
think about the laws of physics, but um
you need to sort of move quickly and
with a lot of energy to get a lot of
these things done. And so I think that's
sort of the first observation. The
second observation is well first of all
you know we've always tried our best to
mitigate um the sort of ill effects. Um
that doesn't mean you're going to be
perfect. No one's perfect in everything.
But I think there's this narrative that
the administration or the secretary sort
of uh don't care about these um stoppage
effects sort of these costs that happen
when there's tremendous change. And I
think, you know, on the one hand, um,
the mainstream media coverage has talked
about in in sort of vague sense the
historic nature of some of these
reforms, right? But it hasn't talked
about what they mean for the next 30 40
years of engagement in the world, right?
And when the secretary is thinking about
these reforms, he's thinking with that
lens, a historical lens, a sort of
generational lens. And when you think
about reforms in that way, the cost
benefit of some disruption in the short
term versus the long-term benefit of
significantly realigning foreign policy,
foreign assistance for the American
people, it makes a lot more sense why
you're willing to tolerate some degree
of disruption. Again, we tried our very
best to mitigate uh disruption. Doesn't
mean that and we can sort of argue all
of these various specifics. we can
engage in the hand-to-hand combat that
many of your colleagues on the reporting
side uh you know would like to engage
in. But ultimately the point here is the
secretary has the vision of what this
means. Um to do diplomacy, real
diplomacy, bilateral relationships. You
want this, I want that. Let's get a deal
done. How are we dealing with this
security situation? How can we talk to
each other so we avoid war? Right? The
last reorganization of the department,
ironically, occurred under Clinton.
Right? And where do they reorganize it
around? They reorganize it around the
growth of sort of policy offices, the
growth of these issue offices, the
growth of this sort of well let's
promote all these ideas, let's engage
with these international organizations.
Let's build all these complicated
bureaucratic multilateral constructs
both inside the US government both sort
of on a global scale. Um, and that's how
we're going to sort of create this
control.
>> But but right but I think the
expectation behind those kind of changes
was that these kind of networks were in
the American national interest. Well,
yeah, but let that's exactly what I want
to talk about.
>> Well, I I just want to I just want to
give a a due explanation of that theory,
right? Because part of what makes the
Trump administration shift meaningful is
it's not just a bureaucratic
reorganization. it is reorganized around
a change in the vision of US foreign
policy where basically the argument that
you're making right is that a network of
civil society promotion non-governmental
organizations and so on funded by US tax
dollars around the world doesn't help
the US get its way around the world and
embedded in that right is the assumption
that where there are you know unpleasant
governments authoritarian governments
and so on part of the postcold war
assumpion was that you know with a
little bit of pushing those governments
would become democracies and that was I
think clearly a big part of what led to
the shift
>> it's demonstrabably failed I mean just
go look back at history and look what
happened I mean what you see is the
growth of these sort of civil society
organizations well-intentioned I'll
grant you but what have they actually
accomplished where have they gone we've
seen you know how they've uh moved
themselves towards authoritarianism with
some of these uh critical ideas that
have grown in the sort of progressive
left, how a lot of these international
organizations have turned to censorship
on a global scale, have turned to regime
change. I mean, one of the key things
about realigning foreign assistance is a
few sort of general principles, right?
The program has to work. It has to be
accountable. It can't be funding. I
mean, you know, we talk about people
talk about fraud, right? Doge didn't
find that much fraud at USAD. It's sort
of a definitional question. What is
fraud? In the sense of, well, you know,
maybe I I defrauded you. Grant says I do
X and I do Y. Right? That's a very
narrow conception of fraud. But is it a
fraud to say you have this organization
that, you know, the New York Times has
painted as feeding all sorts of, you
know, poor and destitute people around
the world, but in fact a significant
portion of the money is going to pay
$400,000 salaries at UC Berkeley to do
climate and sort of race science
research, right? Is that a fraud on the
American people? I mean, I would say it
kind of is.
>> Well, but just just so just to pause on
that issue, right? So, one of the one of
the things that Secretary Rubio has said
and that I believe the vice president
said um when when I interviewed him was
that, you know, in many cases you had um
something like, you know, an 8515 or
9010 ratio, right, of how much aid is
actually getting to people on the ground
versus getting consumed in the kind of
things you're describing. But in fact,
as far as I can see, that's not right.
what that statistic is describing is was
how much aid goes directly to a charity
that you know that is based in Uganda or
Eratraa or wherever else, right? Versus
how much goes to um a charity based in
the US. And yes, some of those
organizations are, you know, connected
to climate projects or what have you,
but a bunch of them are, you know,
things like, you know, Samaritan's Purse
or Catholic Charities, right? like
organizations that historically the US
government for kind of conservative
reasons assumed would be better at
delivering aid. Right? So it it's a
little unclear to me sometimes what the
administration is critiquing. Are you
critiquing sort of leftwing politics or
are you critiquing just you know are you
saying that well you know evangelical
and Catholic charities based in the US
were doing a bad job. Like what what is
the concrete critique there? It can't
all be UC Berkeley climate projects,
right?
>> Again, the idea is it's it's multiffold,
right? There are a lot of different ways
to look at this sort of question that
you're talking about about how much of
the money actually reaches people in
need. You know, you can build from the
idea that a lot of these grants have
really high indirect cost rates. Um,
it's going for programs that are sort of
noncore, that are not desired by the
country, that are not in fact sort of
life-saving in any meaningful sense,
that are not leading to development
goals. But I think just more abstractly
backing up, we have failed to develop a
lot of the places where we've invested
the most money over the last 10 20
years. The system has demonstrabably
failed. We all sort of know it to be
true from a common sense perspective.
The results in Africa, in Southeast
Asia, in in in sort of the Western
Hemisphere from USAD projects and
investments have not been significant.
We have invested hundred billion dollars
through USAD in Africa in the last
decade and China's eaten our lunch,
right? I mean because what we've seen is
that African countries and this is the
president is a tremendous dealmaker. The
secretary is a tremendous dealmaker.
When he sits down with these countries
and I've had the pleasure of you know
participating in some of these meetings
having my own conversations with
governments around the world. What we
hear from the governments is they want
bilateral partnership. They want
economic partnership. They don't want
moralizing. They don't want programs
they can't control. They don't want
these international organizations that
don't care about their sovereignty, that
don't care about their government. They
want to actually develop. I mean from a
historical perspective.
>> So your so your sense so your sense
basically to take the example of China
right is that so China has invested
heavily in Africa along the lines that
that you describe right where
>> actually not not quite along the lines
that I described. China engages in
exploitative debt trap diplomacy. The
belt and road is sort of a trap right
and that's not what we're offering. The
president is offering real genuine above
board bilateral trade relationships. And
sometimes there's an assistant component
of that, whether it's critical minerals,
whether it's investing in sort of um
promotion of infrastructure, real
infrastructure. Like I'm excited that
we're working on a compact that I hope
to announce in the next few weeks um to
deliver Americanmade innovative 21st
century drone infrastructure in a bunch
of countries in Africa to help them do
last mile delivery for humanitarian
assistance and for other purposes,
right? Package delivery, etc. in places
where the road uh infrastructure isn't
as fully developed, right?
>> So then, so you have two things going
on, right? It seems like that that
you're suggesting first you have
>> and at the same time by the way China
has eaten our lunch right so you're
saying but part of but but part of so
part of what you're arguing right is
that essentially the US can do a fairer
better equitable version of the kind of
investment that China has been promising
Africa right so you're saying basically
we've gone in with you know aid and
grants and NOS's and they've gone in and
promised to build trains
ports to use your example maybe now
drone infrastructure right and so you're
saying we can beat China by promising
those kind of deals on better terms
right so that that's part of it right
>> that's part of it and I think with with
an assistance component too right where
it's strategic right I mean so like I
you know I just approved a program to
deploy uh small modular nuclear reactors
built in the United States to an allied
country um to help with their sort of
energy infrastructure we are building
ports we just announced on the back of
the president Which allied country would
that be?
>> I can't tell you. It's not public yet.
But um uh we just announced uh sort of
nearly $100 million in new assistance
building hard infrastructure in the
Philippines. And you know these are
programs again that are developed with
our ambassador. That program was
developed with our ambassador and with
the Philippines government. So and this
is sort of like it's hard
infrastructure. It's stuff that's
actually going to help develop in a
meaningful real sense. It's not going to
be there's this model of UN
humanitarianism and I don't want to go
to like incentives and everything but if
you think about the United Nations
incentives and the UN has grown to be a
massive sort of infrastructure that has
all of these all of the money just goes
from one organization to another the
subcontracts all of this stuff right but
the UN has thousands of employees making
a lot of money all around the world and
they benefit from crises and they
benefit from keeping people dependent
and keeping people sort of from
developing in any meaningful sense from
progressing beyond aid and the secretary
said from the Our vision of success for
foreign assistance is that we don't need
any more foreign assistance. The best
foreign assistance is that which sort of
ends, right? So we will invest uh on the
infrastructure side, on sort of the
economic promotion side, sometimes on
the on the sort of civil liberties side
where appropriate um and and on the
humanitarian component where there's a
real and sort of uh you know exigent
crisis. But we will invest with an eye
towards building countries up to become
bilateral partners and we will make sure
that all of the assistance is tied to
sort of trade market access to foreign
policy priorities etc. And that we think
is going to be better for the countries
that are recipients of aid. Um and that
is obviously going to be better for the
United States because we're uh going to
be investing with a sort of a time scale
that takes into account the fact that we
we need to see results.
>> Okay. So what so what is then on the
humanitarian side? humanitarian aid,
which is the by far the most
controversial aspect of these cuts,
right? And you mentioned, I guess,
hand-to-hand combat with my colleagues
um over over specific cuts that the
administration has either proposed or
actually made. And I should note here
for the audience that it's all a little
complicated to figure out what cuts are
actually happening because there were
cuts that were proposed. There were cuts
that um Congress uh did not approve in
the recisions package. Uh there were
cuts. Well, those are budgetary cuts.
Those are separate from program cuts,
right? I mean, so I I think there's a
fair question about the murkiness of
sort of identifying all of this. Um, I
would say it's been sort of exploited
unfairly um by certain elements of the
media. It's mostly based on leaks from
people in the building. This building
leaks like a civ. I mean, it's kind of
remarkable for now security agency. You
can't keep a single thing secret. Um, we
have to hand walk memos around like
we're in the 40s because if you put
something in our we have an entire
computer system dedicated to memos at
the State Department, right? And if you
actually upload anything there, it's on
Reuters within an hour. So, you can't
use it. So, we're hand walking around
paper like we're in the 40s. And I I
think a lot of it is well meaning,
>> right? But so, not not on the basis of
leaks, just on the basis of our
conversation together, right? the the
administration in the recisions package
asked for cuts to PEPAR budget cuts.
>> Budget cuts, right? Spending cuts. Less
money would be spent, right? Yes.
>> Um
>> less money would be earmarked.
>> Can you confirm in out of all these pots
of money and you know different
different aspects, right? The
administration the administration is
continuing to spend on PEPAR and on
malaria and the administration wants to
spend less money on treating on treating
some of Is no I think when you look at
what PEPAR was spending its money on
those cuts very modest amount of money
that was cut from PEPAR was not for
direct treatment treating people with
HIV and stuff like that it's on sort of
like LGBTQ pro you know uh education
programs or or whatnot that were sort of
funded because PEPAR was was a
tremendously successful project and you
know one of the most successful
humanitarian projects in the history of
the United States right but it became so
successful that it outgrew some of its
need countries graduated sort of their
infection rates came down some of them
became wealthier enough that they could
you know take more of the burden
themselves right because it was so
successful this is a classic DC story
you keep on appropriating more and more
money to PEPAR and then you don't know
what to do with it so you start spending
it on things that are sort of noncore
you start spending it on things that are
sort of outside of the scope of what
it's supposed to be doing. And then
suddenly, I mean, almost anyone in DC
who's thought seriously about these
issues will admit that PEPAR had more
money than it really needed to
accomplish its core HIV um treatment and
sort of disease prevention mission.
>> But presumably a lot of the extra money
was spent on the assumption that ideally
you're not just treating cases of the
disease, right? You mentioned education,
right? like you you know maybe you're
trying to educate people about about you
know not having the kind of sex that
transmits HIV.
>> Sure. And there's a question about
whether those things are abstractly good
or whether the American taxpayer needs
to pay for all of them or whether other
countries whether other multilateral
partners etc can pay for some of these
things. But the secretary is absolutely
committed to um sort of PEPAR's mission
and to to you know beating HIV around
the world. I mean, he committed um uh
you know, I was part of that more than a
billion dollars uh to honor the US
commitment to the global fund to fight
HIV. We continue to spend we just
obligated more than a billion dollars
across PEPAR's global programming um to
sort of continue all of these key
programs around the world uh through the
next few months. So, there's no question
that we remain committed to the program.
We think we can do it more efficiently
and with a different model. The USAD had
tons of sort of US direct hires, people
that were all around the world, a
decentralized payment system that was
built decades ago before we had modern
technology. I mean, the Department of
State, this doesn't get any play, right?
But we helped uh build the first of any
federal agency, as far as I'm aware,
payment system that tracks grants,
appropriations, payments. We have more
than 300 career staff that are already
using it. And so we have more of our
financial controllers at our hub in
Charleston here instead of around the
world. And that's less expensive, right?
So then your operational budget is less
expensive. and you cut some of the
programs where other countries can pick
up some of the slop where you know a
country has has its transmission rates
are low enough it's wealthy enough that
it can share more of the burden of HIV
transmission that's a success story
right in DC that's a failure because
you've stopped giving money somewhere
but you know to anyone else that's a
success story we have helped get a
country's HIV rates low enough that they
can manage it on their own um and so
when we put all those things together
you need a little bit less money to do
the same mission with PEPAR doesn't mean
we're backing away from it So why aren't
you backing away from it? PEPAR is the
most prominent example. It's the case
where there's the most Republican
support for foreign aid precisely, as
you said, because it's seen as this huge
success started under George W. Bush,
right? Um but you know, there's a range
of diseases around the world that are
treatable relatively cheap level. Um the
US is well positioned to support
treatment for those for those diseases
and so on, right? Um but why is it in
America's interest right like what to
make now now I I want you to make the
case the America first case for spending
on HIV prevention HIV treatment malaria
treatment and so on like h how does it
fit into the national interest to spend
money in those areas
>> again you know when we go back to this
vision of foreign assistance there's a
part that is very sort of transactional
economically oriented security
assistance that's very sort of what are
we getting this is a US ally. This is a
US trading partner. We want access to
your markets. All of that. But there's
also a component, the secretary said
this, America will continue to be the
most generous nation in the world. China
does no meaningful humanitarian
assistance. By the way, you know,
there's this myth that China is going to
step in and pay for all these programs.
China does virtually no real
humanitarian assistance. We have done 10
times uh you know what China has done
for the last several years. We will
continue to do several times what China
does, right? And so the United States
there is value in being means-ested,
strategically oriented, sort of narrowly
fighting these these epidemics. And you
know, as as many people have pointed
out, HIV, the scourge of HIV continues
to be sort of a a global and regional
issue. HIV happens to be one where again
the ROI metrics on a lot of these direct
treatment programs are are are high and
so we are seeing efficacy and we are
seeing real results for every dollar
spent. And so again, the administration
continues to look at these things on a
case- by case basis. The president, the
secretary sort of make those judgments
and and PEPAR again is an area where we
continue to invest as is malaria. By the
way, I would say that we obligated a ton
of new money for to fight malaria
because that, as many people have
pointed out, continues to be a very
lowcost, high efficacy way of supporting
humanitarian goals around the world. So
again, the idea that we're backing away
from some of these UN multilateral
constructs, from some of these sort of
we need to solve every problem in the
world and we need to be the only one
doing it, we don't have to ask for sort
of contributions from our allies, from
the countries that are actually dealing
with these problems. Just because we're
backing away with that doesn't mean
we're completely abandoning the idea
that the United States has any
obligation or or sort of that it would
be in our strategic interests to in
targeted and high ROI ways invest in the
world.
>> I want to crisis. I want to walk you
toward the toward the theory behind
that. Just one point. So just one last
point.
>> Yeah.
>> When we do this now, we expect there to
be an end date, right? What we're
objecting to is these programs that have
no expiration date, that create
dependency, that go on for a long time,
that are not closely coordinated with
the countries. So as we think about
realigning PEPAR, one thing that we're
doing is doing more government to
government. Right? This is actually
something that President Obama started
with at USAD where you're doing more
government to government. And I'll tell
you why. Right? with PEPAR and with all
of these health programs, we expect the
government at some point when they're
able to take over more of the
responsibility and so we can kind of
burden share a little bit more, right?
And when the PEPAR crisis or when, you
know, when HIV in a country sort of goes
down, transmission rates go down, the
country becomes wealthy enough, they can
sustain their own healthare system, we
will happily recede and they can take
over, right? What we object to is this
idea we there are humanitarian projects
where the United States has been
investing billions of dollars for 40 50
years with virtually no result no end in
sight no game plan to sort of wind down
or have anyone else do anything and
clearly it's not working if the crisis
has persisted for 30 40 years right and
the aid and the UN that actually
exacerbates the crisis
>> I want you I want you to define I I just
I I'm really interested sorry in the
abstract slightly more abstract question
here which is when the US does something
like funding, you know, funding malaria
treatment or something like that, right?
Does it do this for reasons that are
sort of directly linked to the national
interest where it's like the US wants to
be perceived as altruistic so that other
countries will like us? And I know this
is not your job as you keep saying,
right? This is President Trump's job and
it's Secretary Rubio's job. Um, but you
talk to people higher up than yourself.
Do you have the sense that the Trump
administration believes that some of
these programs are good in and of
themselves or is it more a sense of like
the US wants to, you know, defeat China,
contain China and so on and we want to
be perceived as altruistic? I'd say the
slippery slope of sort of beginning to
to moralize about all these issues
around the world leads you to sort of
the failed um model of the last 40 50
years. I would say that doesn't mean
that as human beings we don't feel
tremendous sort of um you know the
situation in many places in the world is
tremendously challenging and it's sad to
see and you know sort of the global aid
complex which I I really think had grown
to be self- serving and corrupt exploits
in many ways the emotions of people that
understandably feel as though they have
some sort of moral obligation as a human
being to to deal with these crises
around the world. But as an elected
official like the president or the
secretary is appointed and sort of me as
a as an appointee of the administration,
our job is to advocate for American
interests first and foremost. And and
sort of that's full stop, right? It's
Americans that we we champion, we
protect, we advocate for American
interests and American citizens. And so
when we think about these programs, that
has to be our lens um first and
foremost. And so, you know, it it is
rewarding obviously to deliver food, to
deliver aid, and you know, as someone
who's approving a lot of this stuff now,
you feel good when you sort of help
people. There's no question about that.
But again, you have to do it through the
lens of is this good for the United
States? Is there real return here? Is
this a problem that we should be
addressing that that that it advances
our interest? And some of them certainly
are sort of um there are values-based
interests of the United States. No one's
denying that. What are the values-based
interests of the United States?
>> Well, you know, I mean, again, this is a
question that the president and the
secretary define more than me. Um, but
the values based in, you know, we are a
responsible party. We go back to China,
right? You talked about we're doing this
in a way that is more respectful of
people's sovereignty, of their dignity.
I mean, I think it's kind of funny,
right? I I had dinner with a a foreign
minister of a Gulf country who was
talking about how, oh, thank God, you
know, uh, you guys are here because, you
know, in the last administration, it
started under Susan Rice. They kept on
sort of agitating for the unionization
of the foreign workers in my country and
there's a real point of tension with
diplomatic sort of tension between the
United States and this country because
um they started saying well you need to
unionize your foreign workers all of
that stuff right I mean completely
detached from any sort of American
interest and so sort of like you get to
these points where sure I mean you might
abstractly believe in the United States
I happen to not be sort of a proponent
of organized labor but that's another
thing entirely the issue a matter of
>> wait the issue in the Gulf countries
right is whatever you think about
organized labor right is that there is a
scale of exploitation of their foreign
workers that goes a bit beyond
>> is that our problem right I mean is it
our problem to be spending our
diplomatic capital our sort of trade I
mean everything has a cost in diplomacy
that's the fundamental truth of
diplomacy right I mean you have
relationships you have good
relationships with the president
secretary are master sort of negotiators
relationship uh drivers at the same time
the fundamental reality. This is a
realist administration. Countries should
act in their national interest. This is
sort of a general um principle of
economic theory, of geopolitical theory.
Countries should act in their interest
and when they do so and they do so
rationally, you sort of come to
agreements and that's how the system is
supposed to work, right? And so it is
not rationally in our interest for we
were the suckers of the global system
for so long because we're the one of the
only countries in the world that was
sort of bumbling around acting in other
people's interests instead of ours,
right? And you can't serve two masters
at the same time. I mean, as much as
we'd like to sort of advance these
humanitarian interests in our private
capacity and our personal capacity and
our moral capacity, our religious
capacity, ultimately you cannot serve
two masters. The United States and the
United States diplomatic core in the
United States government need to
advocate for American interests,
American citizens, American security
interest, economic interest. But I
started I start we we've just gone
through a long discussion that started
with unionization in the Gulf States in
response to me asking you what are our
values based interests
I'm going to return right so you're
saying that's an example of what it's
not right what is a situation what is a
situation where the US by advancing
>> its moral values the values of a
democratic society that has a bill of
rights right that ex you know that
supports human freedom and human dignity
in some way. What What is the point at
which that becomes part of our foreign
policy if it does?
>> But is it our idea to go panner? I mean,
I think it's it's it's it's funny that
the previous administration that would
talk play identity politics and all of
that was so sort of condescending to
other countries in the world telling
them they needed to manage their
government and their affairs in the same
way that the United States or sort of,
you know, had done it or sort of that
they had to adopt these rights based
principles that we had adopted in our
law or that our voters had endorsed,
right? which is sort of the pinnacle of
um arrogance frankly right and it was
hurting our diplomatic relationship so
what I think it's not is we can proudly
proclaim our own values um and we will
um and there are times at which certain
countries um you know particularly our
allies will abridge certain fundamental
rights um and we will sort of at times
check them there's no question about the
secretary has been very clear about the
sort of abuses of the Venezuelan regime
the president has been very clear about
the abuses of the Brazilian regime in
recent days so there's no question that
sometimes when allied countries and sort
of countries that are our partners
abridge certain fundamental rights, we
will continue to call them out. Um, but
the question is is is our fundamental
purpose in doing that to sort of
moralize to them to sort of get them to
change their own ways or to get them to
live by certain overriding rules? And I
think when we think about overriding
rules, we're thinking much less of
collective rights, much more of
individual liberties and sort of basic
uh theories of the polity um that come
from sort of Judeo-Christian values from
natural rights, juristprudence. So, I
mean, in the State Department
reorganization, we reorganized the
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and
Labor, which reports to me now in sort
of my current capacity, um, to to focus
on these issues on on democracy and
western values, on sort of our
conventional conceptions of democracy,
of individual liberties, of free speech
rather than these sort of tenuous,
attenuated principles of um, collective
rights that are advanced by the United
Nations and in these various policy
documents. I mean, so I mean,
>> well, Jar, let me just, you know, break
the interviewer's mold and give you give
you my own opinion for a minute, and you
can react to this, right? So, I agree
with a lot of your arguments and
critiques about where um administrations
going back to the end of the Cold War
have gone wrong. And I sort of take it
for granted as the Trump administration
does that we're living in a moment where
the US's ability to promote democracy
the way we did around the fall of the
Ber Berlin Wall is quite limited and
we're stuck dealing with regimes in like
the regimes you mentioned in the Middle
East, our allies who are not going to
become democracies anytime soon. We have
to live with that. We have to do
diplomacy with them. We have to do
bilateral diplomacy along the lines that
you described. Um, I think that that is
a very reasonable part of this
administration's vision for the world. I
also though am a very strong supporter
of many of the things that we have done
in terms of basic humanitarian
assistance in places like Africa. And so
what I want from the administration as
an interested observer of its foreign
policy is a sense that its realist
vision of how the world works has room
for saying look you know from our
surplus as a rich country we're going to
save lives in Africa. You know I know
people who you know work as basically
like missionary doctors in really really
really bad parts of the world right who
but who have 12 groups from religious
groups right who are doing that work and
have never before had the opportunity to
engage with the state department USA
because they weren't doing at the scale
they weren't doing it in the way that
sort of fit within the whole UN
bureaucracy all of that who we are going
to try to partner with to deliver
foreign assistance in Africa and other
places and so I you know like we can
have this discussion about whether it's
because of as an abstract philosophical
ical matter whether it's because of some
sort of moral commitment or whether it's
because of our strategic interest but
again the the fact of the matter is
Secretary Rubio and the president have
been very clear we will continue to
deliver life-saving assistance whether
it's in Africa whether it's in the
Middle East whether it's elsewhere in
the world Southeast Asia etc we will
continue to do that but we will continue
to do so more efficiently more tailored
more targetedly you know in a way that
is not creating dependency right and
again the point here is that this is a
really long time scale this is a a
generational again USAD defined this
sort of failed Clintonite engagement in
the world that had us lose to China that
had us fail to develop frankly I mean
you talked about Africa right we may be
keeping people alive as a basic
subsistence matter but for all the money
we spent there did we really help
develop subsaharan Africa not really I
mean we sort of failed in that mission
we have successes sure but we have
plenty of failures um and so I think the
idea here is that over the next couple
of years we will continue to sort of
artic articulate a prospective vision,
to flesh it out, to make investments
that are demonstrative, to show the
American people what President Trump's
priorities are, what Secretary Rubio's
priorities are, but again are grounded
in in American national interests, in
real investments that we think will have
lasting um effects. And as the president
has kept on saying, peace through
strength, peace through trade, peace
through mutual respect. Jer
>> Jeremy, I'm sorry. I'm sorry to try to
keep trying to pin you down on this, but
I just want you to say straightforwardly
for the sake of people who are concerned
by specific stories about cuts to
malaria programs and so on. So you think
it is in the interest of the United
States to save people's lives from
disease where we can around the world?
That's in the That's in the national
interest. Secretary Rubio and President
Trump will continue to support high
impact programs in malaria and PEPFAR
and and HIV and tuberculosis and child
and maternal health and a lot of these
key categories. They're looking at these
programs based on where they are in the
country level, who's implementing them,
what the real results are, what the
costs are, but there will be continued
investment in those programs. We're
excited to make PEP farm more efficient.
We're excited to sort of meet we think
we can meet President Trump's goal of
ending motherto- child transmission by
the end by the time that he leaves
office. Um, so I mean there are a lot of
different things that we're excited
about and they're a key part of our
affirmative vision.
>> Okay. So now looking forward, you keep
talking about this as a generational
change, right? So and we started this
conversation with you talking about what
you as a college kid saw as the failures
of the postcold war paradigm with regard
to China. So, if we were looking back on
this conversation 15 or 20 years from
now and we were looking around Africa or
Latin America or Southeast Asia, what
would you expect to see as indicators of
a successful
change in how America does aid and
development work?
>> That's a great question. Again, I think
I'd like to see real economic
development, trade deals, market access
stuff, American companies investing
there. I mean, we talked about Africa,
right? Chinese companies are all over
Africa and American companies have a
very difficult time accessing those
markets for a variety of reasons. We
have American aid workers everywhere.
But I'd like to see real American
investment. I want to look at subsaharan
Africa and see American companies,
American workers doing trade and sort of
mutual exchange, not just delivering aid
year after year as part of the sort of
UN construct or anything like that.
Right? That would be a real uh measure
of success. And I think the most
important part of this interview is what
you said. Our model is to take what was
a dependency based sort of foreign
assistance for the for the NGO complex
etc. and turn it into something that is
a more appealing more humane version of
the sort of bilateral relationships that
China has been offering successfully
eating our lunch all around the world.
And so that's what's going to define the
next stage of American investment in the
world. It's going to be not sort of
patronizing, not pushing all these these
sort of western causes all around the
world, but saying what we believe in the
way that you are gonna have human
flourishing in your country. And if you
sort of look on a on a scale, what has
led to more um development, life
expectancy, well-being, sort of human
utility around the world than economic
development? That's the cornerstone of
everything. And when we engage in the
world, that's our that's our touchstone,
but with the lens that the United
States's national interest must come
first in every instance.
>> Great, Jeremy Luen. Thanks for joining
me.
>> Thank you so much.
[Music]